Title: A new blog theme!
Date: 2019-06-13 19:00
Author: Benjamin Bouvier
Lang: en
Tags: opensource
Slug: a-new-blog-theme

Just a quick note! I've just updated my blog's design and UI so it is more
convenient, modern and light. It is still using the
[Pelican](https://blog.getpelican.com/) blog system, only the theme has
changed. The previous theme, [Flex](https://github.com/alexandrevicenzi/flex),
was elegant and it has been quite pleasant to use, but it had a few subtle
drawbacks that revealed as time went. Here I explain what were my needs, which
other blog designs inspired me, and link to all the different resources I've
used.

## Embeds: tracking and comments

I use some embeds in my blog: since Pelican generates static files, it can't
handle more complicated features like counting visitors or a comment system.
Soon, I've wanted to get a rough idea of the number of visitors and where they
come from, to understand which posts are the most useful (and of course, to
bless my ego). I've been using self-hosted, open-source systems for that
purpose, like [Matomo](https://matomo.org/) (n√©e Piwik), because I don't want
my blog's visitors to get (even more) tracked by Google Analytics, which would
be counter to my values. This led to a meaningful contribution to add [support
for Matomo](https://github.com/alexandrevicenzi/Flex/pull/15) in the theme, so
other people don't have to redo this work themselves!

Later, I switched over to the [Fathom](https://usefathom.com/) analytics
system, because it's lighter, it knows less about my visitors (only number of
visits/visitors by page and the referrer), and its dashboard is a gazillion
times faster to load (all it loads are static files!) than Matomo's. So I had
to tweak the theme for this too! And then, when I decided to add an embed for a
self-hosted, open-source comment system named [isso](https://posativ.org/isso)
(think of it as an alternative to the centralized Disqus), I needed to add
support for it as well. This meant digging into the theme and understanding how
it works, and each time I wanted to add a new embed, I had to repeat this
process.

## CSS and markup

After reading a well-written and quite interesting online class on typography
on [BetterWebType](https://betterwebtype.com/) (read it if you haven't! it
helped me understanding why some websites were more pleasant to use, and put
explanations onto all the intuitions and feelings I had on the topic), I've
changed a few lines in the CSS source file, tweaking fonts, width, line height
etc.

A few other changes affecting the markup also happened over time, for which I
had to add CSS rules. Of course there were a few conflicts with preexisting
rules, since that's pretty common in CSS; but the fact that I didn't write the
CSS rules in the first place made it harder to understand how and where these
rules were used.

## Writing my own

I also got a bit bored of the design itself, especially the aside bar on the
left which felt a bit early 2010, as well as the overall sense of density. Some
other blogs' strong takes inspired me a lot: in particular, I'd like to point
to my colleague and friend [Paul Adenot's blog](https://blog.paul.cx/), and its
refined, minimalistic design (as well as its amazing body font, look at the
K/it or Q/uo ligatures, they're *insane*). There's also the blog of [Julia
Evans](https://jvns.ca/), which in addition to containing amazingly instructive
blog posts about system programming, shows all the blog posts as a long list in
the index page, making it clear, informative and helps discoverability.

With all of this in mind, since I had to acquire more control over the theme
anyway and I wanted it to look much different, I decided to write my own. Of
course, it's [free
software](https://github.com/bnjbvr/blog.benj.me/tree/sources/themes/modern).
This is what you should be seeing right now.

As an extra to all the items I've mentioned before, I'd like to give a shoutout
to the open-source *fonts* I've used. The header font is
[bluu](http://velvetyne.fr/fonts/bluu/), a font created by Jean-Baptiste
Morizot from the fantastic [Velvetyne](http://velvetyne.fr) type foundry. Go
check it out if you're a typo nerd! or if you're looking for some original and
well-thought fonts. The body font is [Inter UI](https://rsms.me/inter/); it
feels quite modern and it has been designed with computer screens in mind.

Previous vs new home page:

![Previous home page]({static}/images/2019-06-13_new_blog/previous-index.png)
![New home page]({static}/images/2019-06-13_new_blog/new-index.png)

Previous vs new post page:

![Previous post page]({static}/images/2019-06-13_new_blog/previous-post.png)
![New post page]({static}/images/2019-06-13_new_blog/new-post.png)

## Flex thee well

I still think Flex is a great theme to start with, and I'm thankful to the
authors for writing it in the first place, since it has served me well. Thanks!

I'd also like to thank people who gave me feedback and helped me write the CSS
(me can't CSS) about this theme, including Flaburgan, Maiwann, Marien, Thomas
and other [Framasoft](https://framasoft.org/en) friends.

And thank **you** for reading this far! I think blogging and self-hosting are
still important and relevant, to avoid depending on commercial platforms, like
Medium, which repeatedly tries to get you to subscribe, displays thousands of
popovers and attempts to abuse your attention into reading always more (and
spending more time on their website).  It's easy to host your own blog! Even if
you don't have your own server, you can use Github or
[Gitlab](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/project/pages/) pages, with fancy
automatic systems that make publishing a breeze.

I'd be curious to hear your feedback on this new design, including code
improvements (remember? it's free software!). Feel free to type in a comment,
or hit me up on [twitter](https://twitter.com/bnjbvr)!
